# C1C. French Cider

_**French Cider** includes Normandy styles plus ciders inspired by those styles, including ciders made by various techniques to achieve the French flavor profile. These ciders are made with bittersweet and bitter-sharp apple varieties cultivated specifically for cider making._

_Traditional French procedures use small amounts of salt and calcium compounds (calcium chloride, calcium carbonate) to aid the process of pectin coagulation. These compounds may be used, pre-fermentation, but in limited quantity. It is a fault if judges can detect a salty or chalky taste. The enzyme PME (pectin methyl esterase) may also be used pre-fermentation for pectin coagulation._

_Note that the sweetness/gravity levels indicate an overall tendency, not a sharp delineation between English and French ciders._

## Overall Impression: 

Medium to sweet, full-bodied, rich.

## Aroma/Flavor: 

Fruity character/aroma. This may come from slow or arrested fermentation (in the French technique of _défécation_) or approximated by back-sweetening with juice. Tends to a rich fullness. MLF notes of spicy-smoky, phenolic, and farmyard are common but not required (just as with English style), and must not be pronounced. The French expect more subtle MLF character than do the English.

## Appearance: 

Clear to brilliant, medium yellow to amber color.

## Mouthfeel: 

Medium to full, mouth-filling. Moderate tannin, perceived mainly as astringency. Carbonation moderate to champagne-like, but at higher levels it must not gush or foam.

## Comments: 

Typically made sweet to balance the tannin levels from the traditional apple varieties.

## Entry Instructions: 

Entrants **MUST** specify carbonation level (3 levels). Entrants **MUST** specify sweetness (medium to sweet only, 3 levels). Entrants **MAY** specify variety of apple for a single varietal cider; if specified, varietal character will be expected.

## Varieties: 

Nehou, Muscadet de Dieppe, Reine des Pommes, Michelin, etc.

## Vital Statistics:	
- OG:	1.050 - 1.065 
- FG:	1.010 - 1.020
- ABV:	3.0 - 6.0%

## Commercial Examples: 

[US] West County Reine de Pomme (MA), [France] Eric Bordelet (various), Etienne Dupont, Etienne Dupont Organic, Bellot
