# M2E. Melomel

_The **melomel** subcategory is for fruit meads made with any fruit not associated with any other fruit mead subcategory, or with a combination of fruits from multiple fruit mead subcategories (such as grapes and stone fruit). Some examples include citrus fruit, dried fruits (dates, prunes, raisins, etc.), pears, figs, pomegranates, prickly pear, bananas, pineapples, and most other tropical fruit. If in doubt, enter the fruit here – judges should be flexible with fruit not explicitly named in other categories. The use of Melomel as a subcategory name does not imply that other meads in the Fruit Mead category are not also melomels; the choice was made to avoid using the same word twice in different contexts. The culinary, not botanical, definition of fruit is used here. If you have to justify a fruit using the word “technically” as part of the description, then that’s not what we mean._

## Overall Impression: 

In well-made examples of the style, the fruit is both distinctive and well-incorporated into the honey- sweet-acid-tannin-alcohol balance of the mead. Different types of fruit can result in widely different characteristics; allow for a variation in the final product.

## Aroma: 

Depending on the sweetness and strength, a subtle to distinctly identifiable honey and fruit character (dry and/or hydromel versions will tend to have lower aromatics than sweet and/or sack versions). The fruit character should display distinctive aromatics associated with the particular fruit(s); however, note that some fruit have stronger aromas and are more distinctive than others — allow for a range of fruit character and intensity from subtle to aggressive. The fruit character should be pleasant and supportive, not artificial, raw (unfermented), and/or inappropriately overpowering (considering the character of the fruit). In a blended fruit melomel, not all the fruits may be individually identifiable or of equal intensity. The honey aroma should be noticeable, and can have a light to significant sweetness that may express the aroma of flower nectar. If a variety of honey is declared, the aroma might have a subtle to very noticeable varietal character reflective of the honey (different varieties have different intensities and characters). The bouquet should show a pleasant fermentation character, with clean and fresh aromatics being preferred. Stronger and/or sweeter versions will have higher alcohol and sweetness in the nose. Some tartness may be present if naturally occurring in the particular fruit(s), but should not be inappropriately intense. Standard description applies for remainder of characteristics.

## Appearance: 

Standard description applies, except with regard to color. Color may take on a very wide range of colors, depending on the variety of fruit and/or honey used. For lighter- colored melomels with fruits that exhibit distinctive colors, the color should be noticeable. Note that the color of fruit in mead is often lighter than the flesh of the fruit itself and may take on slightly different shades. Meads made with lighter color fruits can also take on color from varietal honeys. In meads that produce a head, the head can take on some of the fruit color as well.

## Flavor: 

The fruit and honey flavor intensity may vary from subtle to high; the residual sweetness may vary from none to high; and the finish may range from dry to sweet, depending on what sweetness level has been declared (dry to sweet) and strength level has been declared (hydromel to sack). The natural acidity and tannin levels from fruit and fruit skins will vary, and this character is expected to be present in the mead, although in balance with sweetness, honey flavor, and alcohol. Tannin levels may make some meads seem drier than the residual sweetness might suggest. A melomel may have a subtle to strong honey character, and may feature noticeable to prominent varietal character if a varietal honey is declared (different varieties have different intensities). The distinctive flavor character associated with the particular fruit(s) should be noticeable, and may range in intensity from subtle to aggressive. The balance of fruit with the underlying mead is vital, and the fruit character should not be artificial, raw (unfermented), and/or inappropriately overpowering. In a melomel made with a combination of fruits, not all the fruits may be individually identifiable or of equal intensity. Standard description applies for remainder of characteristics.

## Mouthfeel: 

Standard description applies. Most will be wine- like. Some natural acidity and/or tannin are sometimes present (from certain fruit and/or fruit skin) and helps balance the overall impression. Fruit tannin can add body as well as some astringency. High levels of astringency are undesirable. The acidity and tannin levels should be somewhat reflective of the fruit used.

## Ingredients: 

Standard description applies. A melomel is a mead made with the addition of other fruit or fruit juices not specifically reserved for other entry subcategories. There should be an appealing blend of the fruit and honey character but not necessarily an even balance. A melomel can be made with a blend of fruits from multiple _Fruit Mead_ subcategories.

## Comments: 

Generally a good tannin-sweetness balance is desired, though very dry and very sweet examples do exist.

## Entry Instructions: 

_See_ Introduction to Mead Guidelines _for entry requirements._ Entrants **MUST** specify carbonation level, strength, and sweetness. Entrants **MAY** specify honey varieties. Entrants **MUST** specify the varieties of fruit used. A melomel that is spiced should be entered as a _Fruit and Spice Mead_. A melomel containing other ingredients should be entered as an _Experimental Mead_. Melomels made with either apples or grapes as the only fruit source should be entered as a _Cyser_ or _Pyment_, respectively. Melomels with apples or grapes, plus other fruit should be entered in this category, not _Experimental Mead_.

## Commercial Examples: 

Moonlight Desire, Paramour, and Iniquity