# 16C. Tropical Stout

## Overall Impression: 

A very dark, sweet, fruity, moderately strong ale with smooth roasty flavors without a burnt harshness.

## Aroma: 

Sweetness evident, moderate to high intensity. Roasted grain aromas moderate to high, and can have coffee or chocolate notes. Fruitiness medium to high. May have a molasses, licorice, dried fruit, and/or vinous aromatics. Stronger versions can have a subtle clean aroma of alcohol. Hop aroma low to none. Diacetyl low to none.

## Appearance: 

Very deep brown to black in color. Clarity usually obscured by deep color (if not opaque, should be clear). Large tan to brown head with good retention.

## Flavor: 

Quite sweet with a smooth dark grain flavors, and restrained bitterness. Roasted grain and malt character can be moderate to high with a smooth coffee or chocolate flavor, although the roast character is moderated in the balance by the sweet finish. Moderate to high fruity esters. Can have a sweet, dark rum-like quality. Little to no hop flavor. Medium-low to no diacetyl.

## Mouthfeel: 

Medium-full to full body, often with a smooth, creamy character. May give a warming (but never hot) impression from alcohol presence. Moderate to moderately-high carbonation.

## Comments: 

Sweetness levels can vary significantly. Surprisingly refreshing in a hot climate.

## History: 

Originally high-gravity stouts brewed for tropical markets, became popular and imitated by local brewers often using local sugars and ingredients.

## Characteristic Ingredients: 

Similar to a sweet stout, but with more gravity. Pale and dark roasted malts and grains. Hops mostly for bitterness. May use adjuncts and sugar to boost gravity. Typically made with warm-fermented lager yeast.

## Style Comparison: 

Tastes like a scaled-up sweet stout with higher fruitiness. Similar to some Imperial Stouts without the high bitterness, strong/burnt roastiness, and late hops, and with lower alcohol. Much more sweet and less hoppy than American Stouts. Much sweeter and less bitter than the similar-gravity Export Stouts.

## Vital Statistics:	

- OG:	1.056 – 1.075
- FG:	1.010 – 1.018
- IBUs:	30 – 50	
- SRM:	30 – 40	
- ABV:	5.5 – 8.0%

## Commercial Examples: 

ABC Extra Stout, Dragon Stout, Jamaica Stout, Lion Stout, Royal Extra Stout

## Tags: 

_high-strength, dark-color, top-fermented, british-isles, traditional-style, stout-family, malty, roasty, sweet_
