# 28B. Mixed-Fermentation Sour Beer

## Overall Impression: 

A sour and/or funky version of a base style of beer.

## Aroma: 

Variable by base style. The contribution of non-Saccharomyces microbes should be noticeable to strong, and often contribute a sour and/or funky, wild note. The best examples will display a range of aromatics, rather than a single dominant character. The aroma should be inviting, not harsh or unpleasant. 

## Appearance: 

Variable by base style. Clarity can be variable; some haze is not a fault. Head retention can be poor due to high levels of acid or anti-foam properties of some lactobacillus strains.

## Flavor: 

Variable by base style. Look for an agreeable balance between the base beer and the fermentation character. A range of results is possible from fairly high acidity/funk to a subtle, pleasant, harmonious beer. The best examples are pleasurable to drink with the esters and phenols complementing the malt and/or hops. The wild character can be prominent, but does not need to be dominating in a style with an otherwise strong malt/hop profile. Acidity should be firm yet enjoyable, but should not be biting or vinegary; prominent or objectionable/offensive acetic acid is a fault. Bitterness tends to be low, especially as sourness increases.

## Mouthfeel: 

Variable by base style. Generally a light body, almost always lighter than what might be expected from the base style. Generally moderate to high carbonation, although often lower in higher alcohol examples.

## Comments: 

These beers may be aged in wood, but any wood character should not be a primary or dominant flavor. Sour beers are typically not bitter as these flavors clash. The base beer style becomes less relevant because the various yeast and bacteria tend to dominate the profile. Inappropriate characteristics include diacetyl, solvent, ropy/viscous texture, and heavy oxidation.

## History: 

Modern American craft beer interpretations of Belgian sour ales, or experimentations inspired by Belgian sour ales.

## Characteristic Ingredients: 

Virtually any style of beer. Usually fermented by _Lactobacillus_ and/or _Pediococcus_, often in conjunction with _Saccharomyces_ and/or _Brettanomyces_. Can also be a blend of styles. Wood or barrel aging is very common, but not required.

## Style Comparison: 

A sour and/or funky version of a base style.

## Entry Instructions: 

The entrant **must** specify a description of the beer, identifying the yeast/bacteria used and either a base style or the ingredients/specs/target character of the beer.

## Vital Statistics: 

Variable by style

## Commercial Examples: 

Boulevard Love Child, Cascade Vlad the Imp Aler, Jester King Le Petit Prince, Jolly Pumpkin Calabaza Blanca, Russian River Temptation, The Bruery Rueuze, The Bruery Tart of Darkness

## Tags:

_wild-fermentation, north-america, craft-style, specialty-beer, sour_
