# 29C. Specialty Fruit Beer

_A Specialty Fruit Beer is a fruit beer with some additional ingredients or processes, such as fermentable sugars (honey, brown sugar, invert sugar, etc.) added._

_See the_ Introduction to Specialty-Type Beer _section for additional comments, particularly on evaluating the balance of added ingredients with the base beer._

## Overall Impression: 

A harmonious marriage of fruit, sugar, and beer, but still recognizable as a beer. The fruit and sugar character should both be evident but in balance with the beer, not so forward as to suggest an artificial product.

## Aroma: 

Same as fruit beer, except that some additional fermentables (honey, molasses, etc.) may add an aroma component. Whatever additional aroma component is present should be in balance with the fruit and the beer components, and be a pleasant combination.

## Appearance: 

Same as fruit beer.

## Flavor: 

Same as fruit beer, except that some additional fermentables (honey, molasses, etc.) may add a flavor component. Whatever additional flavor component is present should be in balance with the fruit and the beer components, and be a pleasant combination. Added sugars should not have a raw, unfermented flavor. Some added sugars will have unfermentable elements that may provide a fuller finish; fully fermentable sugars may thin out the finish.

## Mouthfeel: 

Same as fruit beer, although depending on the type of sugar added, could increase or decrease the body.

## Comments: 

If the additional fermentables or processes do not add a distinguishable character to the beer, enter it as a normal 29A Fruit Beer and omit a description of the extra ingredients or processes.

## Entry Instructions: 

The entrant **must** specify a base style; the declared style does not have to be a _Classic Style_. The entrant **must** specify the type of fruit used. The entrant **must** specify the type of additional fermentable sugar or special process employed.

## Vital Statistics: 

OG, FG, IBUs, SRM and ABV will vary depending on the underlying base beer, but the fruit will often be reflected in the color.

## Commercial Examples: 

New Planet Raspberry Ale

## Tags: 

_specialty-beer, fruit_
