# 31A. Alternative Grain Beer

_An **Alternative Fermentables Beer** is a standard beer (Classic Style or not) with additional or non-standard brewing grains (e.g., rye, oats, buckwheat, spelt, millet, sorghum, rice, etc.) added or used exclusively. Gluten-free (GF) beers made from completely gluten-free ingredients may be entered here, while GF beers using process-based gluten removal should be entered in their respective base style categories._

_See the_ Introduction to Specialty-Type Beer _section for additional comments, particularly on evaluating the balance of added ingredients with the base beer._

## Overall Impression: 

A base beer enhanced by or featuring the character of additional grain or grains. The specific character depends greatly on the character of the added grains.

## Aroma: 

Same as base beer style. The added grain will lend a particular character, although with some grains the beer will simply seem a bit more grainy or nutty. The alternative grain should provide the major aroma profile for this beer.

## Appearance: 

Same as base beer style, although some additional haze may be noticeable.

## Flavor: 

Same as base beer style. The additional grain should be noticeable in flavor, although it may not be necessarily identifiable. However, the alternative grain should provide the major flavor profile for this beer. Different grains have different characters; the additional grain should enhance the flavor of the base beer. Many will add an additional grainy, bready, or nutty flavor.

## Mouthfeel: 

Same as the base beer, although many additional grains will tend to increase the body (oats, rye) and increase the viscosity, while some may decrease the body (GF grains) resulting in thinness. 

## Comments: 

If the alternative grain does not provide a noticeable distinguishable character to the beer, enter it as the base style. This style should not be used for styles where the alternative grain is fundamental to the style definition (e.g., Rye IPA, Oatmeal Stout, Rice- or Corn-based International Lager). Note that sake is not beer, and is not intended for this category.

## Entry Instructions: 

The entrant **must** specify a base style, but the declared style does not have to be a _Classic Style_. The entrant **must** specify the type of alternative grain used. 
Vital Statistics: OG, FG, IBUs, SRM and ABV will vary depending on the underlying base beer.

## Commercial Examples: 

Green’s Indian Pale Ale, Lakefront New Grist, New Planet Pale Ale

## Tags: 

_specialty-beer_
