# 3A. Czech Pale Lager

## Overall Impression: 

A lighter-bodied, rich, refreshing, hoppy, bitter pale Czech lager having the familiar flavors of the stronger Czech Premium Pale Lager (Pilsner-type) beer but in a lower alcohol, lighter-bodied, and slightly less intense format.

## Aroma: 

Light to moderate bready-rich malt combined with light to moderate spicy or herbal hop bouquet; the balance between the malt and hops may vary. Faint hint of caramel is acceptable. Light (but never intrusive) diacetyl and light, fruity hop-derived esters are acceptable, but need not be present. No sulfur.

## Appearance: 

Light gold to deep gold color. Brilliant to very clear, with a long-lasting, creamy white head. 

## Flavor: 

Medium-low to medium bready-rich malt flavor with a rounded, hoppy finish. Low to medium-high spicy or herbal hop flavor. Bitterness is prominent but never harsh. Flavorful and refreshing. Diacetyl or fruity esters are acceptable at low levels, but need not be present and should never be overbearing.

## Mouthfeel: 

Medium-light to medium body. Moderate carbonation. 

## Comments: 

The Czech name of the style is světlé výčepní pivo. 

## History: 

Josef Groll initially brewed two types of beer in 1842–3, _a výčepní and a ležák_, with the smaller beer having twice the production; Evan Rail speculates that these were probably 10 °P and 12 °P beers, but that the _výčepní_ could have been weaker. This is the most consumed type of beer in the Czech Republic at present.
 
## Characteristic Ingredients: 

Soft water with low sulfate and carbonate content, Saazer-type hops, Czech Pilsner malt, Czech lager yeast. Low ion water provides a distinctively soft, rounded hop profile despite high hopping rates. 

## Style Comparison: 

A lighter-bodied, lower-intensity, refreshing, everyday version of Czech Premium Pale Lager.

## Vital Statistics:	

- OG:	1.028 – 1.044
- FG:	1.008 – 1.014
- IBUs:	20 – 35	
- SRM:	3 – 6	
- ABV:	3.0 – 4.1%

## Commercial Examples: 

Březňák Světlé výčepní pivo, Notch Session Pils, Pivovar Kout na Šumavě Koutská 10°, Únětické pivo 10°

## Tags: 

_session-strength, pale-color, bottom-fermented, lagered, central-europe, traditional-style, pale-lager-family, bitter, hoppy_
