# 5B. K&ouml;lsch

## Overall Impression: 

A clean, crisp, delicately-balanced beer usually with a very subtle fruit and hop character. Subdued maltiness throughout leads into a pleasantly well-attenuated and refreshing finish. Freshness makes a huge difference with this beer, as the delicate character can fade quickly with age. Brilliant clarity is characteristic.

## Aroma: 

Low to very low malt aroma, with a grainy-sweet character. A pleasant, subtle fruit aroma from fermentation (apple, cherry or pear) is acceptable, but not always present. A low floral, spicy or herbal hop aroma is optional but not out of style. Some yeast strains may give a slight winy or sulfury character (this characteristic is also optional, but not a fault). Overall, the intensity of aromatics is fairly subtle but generally balanced, clean, and fresh.

## Appearance: 

Very pale gold to light gold. Very clear (authentic commercial versions are filtered to a brilliant clarity). Has a delicate white head that may not persist.

## Flavor: 

Soft, rounded palate comprised of a delicate flavor balance between soft yet attenuated malt, an almost imperceptible fruity sweetness from fermentation, and a medium-low to medium bitterness with a delicate dryness and slight crispness in the finish (but no harsh aftertaste). The malt tends to be grainy-sweet, possibly with a very light bready or honey quality. The hop flavor is variable, and can range from low to moderately-high; most are medium-low to medium intensity and have a floral, spicy, or herbal character. May have a malty-sweet impression at the start, but this is not required. No noticeable residual sweetness. May have a slightly winy, minerally, or sulfury accent that accentuates the dryness and flavor balance. A slight wheat taste is rare but not a fault. Otherwise, very clean.

## Mouthfeel: 

Medium-light to medium body (most are medium-light). Medium to medium-high carbonation. Smooth and generally crisp and well-attenuated.

## Comments: 

Characterized in Germany as a top-fermented, lagered beer. Each K&ouml;ln brewery produces a beer of different character, and each interprets the _K&ouml;lsch Konvention_ slightly differently. Allow for a range of variation within the style when judging. Note that drier versions may seem hoppier or more bitter than the IBU specifications might suggest. Due to its delicate flavor profile, K&ouml;lsch tends to have a relatively short shelf-life; older examples and imports can easily show some oxidation defects. Served in K&ouml;ln in a tall, narrow 200ml glass called a _Stange_.

## History: 

Cologne, Germany (K&ouml;ln) has a top-fermenting brewing tradition since the Middle Ages, but developed the beer now known as K&ouml;lsch in the late 1800s to combat encroaching bottom-fermented pale lagers. K&ouml;lsch is an appellation protected by the _K&ouml;lsch Konvention_ (1986), and is restricted to the 20 or so breweries in and around K&ouml;ln. The _Konvention_ simply defines the beer as a “light, highly attenuated, hop-accentuated, clear, top-fermenting _Vollbier_.” 

## Characteristic Ingredients: 

Traditional German hops (Hallertau, Tettnang, Spalt or Hersbrucker). German Pils or pale malt. Attenuative, clean ale yeast. Up to 20% wheat malt may be used, but this is quite rare in authentic versions. Current commercial practice is to ferment warm, cold condition for a short period of time, and serve young.

## Style Comparison: 

To the untrained taster, easily mistaken for a cream ale or somewhat subtle Pils.

## Vital Statistics:	

- OG:	1.044 – 1.050
- FG:	1.007 – 1.011
- IBUs:	18 – 30	
- SRM:	3.5 – 5	
- ABV:	4.4 – 5.2%

## Commercial Examples: 

Früh K&ouml;lsch, Gaffel K&ouml;lsch, Mühlen K&ouml;lsch, Reissdorf K&ouml;lsch, Sion K&ouml;lsch, Sünner K&ouml;lsch

## Tags: 
_standard-strength, pale-color, top-fermented, lagered, central-europe, traditional-style, pale-ale-family, balanced_
