# Style Description Language

The guidelines are a set of long documents, and some style descriptions are quite lengthy. To keep the prose from being bone-dry boring, synonyms (words or phrases meaning exactly the same thing, or having nearly the same meaning) are frequently used. Do not attempt to read more into the use of synonyms than is intended. In the past, some have questioned the difference between _light_ and _low_, _medium_ and _moderate_, _deep_ and _dark_, and many other similar examples - the answer is there is no difference in these words in the context in which they are used; they are intended to mean the same things (often, relative intensities of perceptions). Take these words at their plain meaning. If you find yourself parsing the guidelines like you’re trying to find a secret message if played backwards, you’re trying too hard.

When we use multiple words to mean similar things, we are simply trying to be literate, and to use a reasonably educated vocabulary. We don’t want to be the Language Police and say that one synonym is always right, and others are always wrong. So don’t be looking for inconsistencies in usage or try to add nuanced distinctions in different words used to express the same concept. Don’t require that words in the style guidelines be the exact same words used on scoresheets or exams. Worry more about the concept being conveyed and less about the precise expression of the concept.

Pay careful attention to the modifiers used in describing the styles. Look for guidance on the magnitude and quality of each characteristic. Notice that many characteristics are optional; beers not evidencing these non-required elements should not be marked down. Phrases such as _may have, can contain, might feature, is acceptable, is appropriate, is typical_, etc. all indicate **optional** elements. **Required** elements are generally written as declaratory phrases, or use words such as must or _should_. Elements that must **not** be present often use phrases such as is _inappropriate, no,_ or _must not._ Again, take these words at their plain meaning.

Do not overly focus on single words or phrases within style descriptions to the exclusion of the broader intent. Understand the overall impression of the style, the general balance, and how the style differs from related or similar styles. Do not disproportionately weight specific phrases if that would change the overall impression, balance, and meaning of the style, or if it would cause the beer to be disqualified or otherwise marked down for style issues.
