# Naming of Styles and Categories

Some people get so lost in the specific names we use for beer styles and categories that they don’t seem to understand the descriptions of the actual styles. Our names are simply identifiers that we have chosen to best represent the styles and groupings described. Styles were named first, then grouped by similar characteristics or region of origin, then the groupings were named. 

We understand that many of these styles can have different names and are called different things in different (or even the same) parts of the world. In the past, we often used several of these names in the style title to avoid showing a preference, but this too often led to people incorrectly using all the names simultaneously. So understand that we have selected names that are either commonly used or are descriptive of a style that might not have a local name. We are not attempting to tell breweries what they should call their products; we are attempting to have a common name that can be used for easy reference.

Some names we use are protected appellations. We are not saying that these should not be respected, or that all commercial breweries should use these names. Rather that these are the most appropriate names to describe the styles. If this concept is hard to understand, just assume that there is an implied “-style” designation on every style name. We didn’t want to use “-style” anywhere in names since these are style guidelines, and of course everything is a style.

We sometimes had to choose names that included a country or region of origin to differentiate between styles that used the same name (such as Porter). The names we use in these cases are intended to be descriptive, and not necessarily what the products are called in local markets. So one should not infer that we are telling brewers that they should be renaming their beers.

The use of country or region names in style and category names is also not meant to imply that those styles are only made in those countries or regions, simply that they either originated in or were popularized in those areas. Many styles are now quite worldwide, with subtle differences reflective of local ingredients. Remember the implied usage of “-style” when considering the differences in these products, and whether they truly represent a different style or are simply the normal variation you would see between breweries of a similar product. 

We are not using country or region names to imply ownership or any other preferred standing. When names in common usage exist, we prefer to use them for styles rather than selecting a broader geographic name. We understand that some names bring along political, ethnic, or social conflict; we take no position on any of these - we’re trying to describe beer, not settle disputes. 
