# C3B. Spiced Cider

_A cider with any combination of “botanicals” added. Hopped ciders are allowable in this category, in addition to ciders with the spices, herbs, and vegetables referenced in the Specialty Cider preamble._

## Overall Impression: 

A pleasant integration of cider and added spices. The apple character must combine with the botanicals to give a balanced result. If a base style is declared, should show some evidence of that style.

## Aroma/Flavor: 

The apple character and added botanicals must both be noticeable and complementary. As with a fruit cider, it is a fault if the botanicals dominate or seem artificial. Likewise, harsh or raw spice flavors are undesirable. Hops, if used, should have a fresh, green character, not a grassy, vegetal quality. Note that some botanicals are stronger than others. Oxidation of either the special ingredients or the base cider is a fault.

## Appearance: 

Clear to brilliant, as appropriate for the base style. Color appropriate to the added botanicals and base style.

## Mouthfeel: 

Reflecting base style. Cider may be tannic or astringent from the effect of added botanicals but must not be bitter from over-extraction. Some ingredients may contribute tannins, bitterness, sourness, or other effects.

## Comments: 

The final product must retain a cider character from the apples. Hopped ciders typically display a fresh ‘dry hop’ character, not bitterness, from the hops. The description of the cider is critical information for judges, and should be sufficient for them to understand the concept. If special ingredients are declared, they should be perceived (exception: potential allergens do not need to be perceivable, but must be declared).

## Entry Instructions: 

Entrants **MUST** specify both carbonation and sweetness levels. Entrants **MUST** specify all spices added. If hops are used, entrant **MUST** specify the varieties. Entrants **MAY** specify a base cider style.

## Varieties: 

Any, depending on base cider

## Vital Statistics:	
- OG:	1.045 - 1.070
- FG:	0.995 - 1.010
- ABV:	5.0 - 9.0%

## Commercial Examples: 

Æppeltreow Sparrow Spiced Cider, Finnriver Dry Hopped Cider, Left Foot Charley Cinnamon Girl, Montana CiderWorks Hopped Up, Oliver’s At the Hop, Seattle Cider Basil Mint, Uncle John’s Atomic Apple