# C4C. Ice Perry

_A regional style (Poiré de Glace) originating in Quebec in the 2000s, often produced by cideries or domaines where ice cider is made using a similar process. Pear juice is frozen before fermentation to concentrate sugars. Fermentation is often arrested before completion to achieve the desired sweetness level. Sweeteners must not be used to adjust the starting or finishing gravity._

## Overall Impression: 

Full-bodied, bright, and fruity, with a balanced acidity. Sweet, but not cloying. Still to pétillant.

## Aroma/Flavor: 

Fruity, smooth, sweet-tart. The fruit aroma is clear and bright, often like poached pears, fruit preserves, or candied peaches. The light to moderate fruit flavors can seem like pears that have been cooked, dried, preserved, candied, or caramelized. The soft, rounded finish may have additional notes of honey, nuts, pastries, or tropical fruit. Acidity must be sufficient to prevent it from seeming to be cloying. May be tannic (astringent or bitter) but this should be slight to moderate at most. Should not be mousy, ropy, or oily. Noticeable acetone is a fault. Only very slight acetification is acceptable.

## Appearance: 

Gold to amber color. Clear to crystal clear. Usually still, but light evidence of carbonation is allowed.

## Mouthfeel: 

Full body. Supple, smooth texture, with a very long, silky finish. Alcohol warmth is light to moderately low, although may not be perceivable due to the sweetness. Most examples are still, but a light carbonation is acceptable.

## Comments:

While originating in Canada, not exclusively a Canadian product. The level of tannin and acidity is noticeably lower than in Ice Cider.

## Entry Instructions: 

Entrants **MUST** specify starting gravity, final gravity or residual sugar, alcohol level, and carbonation level.

## Varieties: 

Bartlett, Bosc, Flemish Beauty, other table pears

## Vital Statistics:	
- OG:	1.130 - 1.170
- FG:	1.050 - 1.085
- ABV:	9.0 - 12.0%

## Commercial Examples: 

Coteau Rougemont Poiré de Glace, Domaine de la Galotière Poiré de Glace, Domaine de Lavoie Poiré de Glace, Vergers Écologiques Philion Gaia, Domaine des Salamandres Le Classique
