# Kellerbier or Zwickelbier Ale

Kellerbier or Zwickelbier Ales are the color of the underlying German ale style. Appearance may or may not be clear. They may appear slightly hazy to moderately cloudy. Exhibiting a small amount of yeast haze is acceptable and traditional. These beers must be unfiltered, but may be naturally clear due to settling of yeast during aging. Head retention may not be optimal. Kellerbier Ales are unfiltered German-style Altbier and Kölsch. Aromas typical of the underlying beer style are present. Fruity-ester levels should align with the filtered version, but may be perceived at slightly higher or lower levels due to age and presence of yeast. Yeast aroma is desirable, yet should be low to medium in balance with character of malt and hops. Low to moderately low levels of yeast-generated sulfur- containing compounds should be apparent in aroma, and low levels of acetaldehyde or other volatiles normally reduced during lagering may or may not be apparent. Hop aroma is sometimes suppressed by the presence of yeast, depending on style. Malt character will vary with style (see individual style descriptions). Hop flavor is sometimes suppressed by the presence of yeast, depending on style. Hop bitterness is sometimes suppressed by the presence of yeast, depending on style. Yeast flavor is desirable, yet should be low to medium in balance with character of malt and hops. Low to moderately low levels of yeast-generated sulfur containing compounds should be apparent in flavor, and low levels of acetaldehyde or other volatiles normally reduced during lagering may or may not be apparent. The sulfur and acetaldehyde characters should contribute positively to the beer drinking experience. Body is variable with style. These unfiltered German-style ales are packaged and/or served intentionally with low to moderate amounts of yeast. Products may be filtered and again dosed with yeast in the package, manifesting themselves as bottle conditioned beers or unfiltered beer with yeast present. During registration brewers may specify pouring instructions, choosing normal pouring, quiet pouring or intentional rousing of yeast. Entries will be presented during judging as specified by entering brewer. Beers containing novel ingredients or aged in flavor-imparting vessels would be more appropriately characterized in other beer styles. _A statement by the brewer explaining the underlying classic German ale style is essential for accurate assessment in competitions._

## Vital Statistics:

- OG: Varies with style
- FG: Varies with style
- IBUs: Varies with style
- SRM: Varies with style
- ABV: Varies with style