# American-Style Fruit Beer

American-Style Fruit Beers are any range of color from pale to very dark depending on the underlying style, and will often reflect the color of added fruit to some degree. Clear or hazy beer is acceptable in appearance. Fruit aromas ranging from subtle to intense should be evident, and should not be overpowered by hop aromas. American- Style Fruit Beers are fermented with traditional German, British or American ale or lager yeast using fruit or fruit extracts as an adjunct in either the mash, kettle, primary or secondary fermentation providing obvious (ranging from subtle to intense), yet harmonious, fruit qualities. Fruit beers fermented using Belgian-, wit-, abbey-, farmhouse-, saison- and/or _Brettanomyces_-type yeast would be more appropriately categorized as Belgian-Style Fruit Beer or possibly as fruited versions of Brett Beer. Hop aroma is not perceived to medium-low. Malt sweetness can vary from none to medium-high levels. Hop flavor is not perceived to medium-low. Hop bitterness is in balance and usually at very low to medium levels. Fruit qualities should not be overpowered by hop character. Acidic bacterial (not wild yeast) fermentation characters may be evident (but not necessary) and if present contribute to acidity and enhance fruity balance. Body is variable with style. Classifying these beers is complex with exemplary versions depending on the exhibition of fruit characters more so than the addition of fruit itself. As an example, a juniper berry- flavored beer with notable juniper berry fruity flavor and/or aroma characters evident would be appropriately characterized as Fruit Beer; whereas such a beer in which juniper berry characters are expressed more as herbal or spice quality would appropriately be categorized as Herb and Spice Beer. Fruit Beer with wheat as an ingredient would be appropriately characterized as Fruit Wheat Beer. Fruit Beer brewed with unusual fermentable(s) (other than wheat) would be appropriately characterized as Fruit Beer. For purposes of competition, coconut is defined as a vegetable, and beers containing coconut would be appropriately entered as Field Beer. _A statement by the brewer explaining what fruits are used (and other ingredients if present) is essential in order for accurate assessment in competitions. If this beer is a classic style with fruit, the brewer should also specify the classic style._

## Vital Statistics:

- OG: 1.030 - 1.110
- FG: 1.006 - 1.030
- IBUs: 5 - 45
- SRM: 5 - 50
- ABV: 2.5 - 12.0%