# Brett Beer

Brett Beers are any range of color and may take on the color of added fruits or other ingredients. Chill haze and yeast-induced haze are allowable at low to medium levels at any temperature. Moderate to intense yet balanced fruity-ester aromas are evident. In darker versions, roasted malt, caramel-like and chocolate-like aromas are subtly present. Diacetyl and DMS aromas should not be perceived. Hop aroma is evident over a full range from low to high. In darker versions, roasted malt, caramel-like and chocolate-like flavors are subtly present. Fruited versions will exhibit fruit flavors in harmonious balance with other characters. Hop flavor is evident over a full range from low to high. Hop bitterness is evident over a full range from low to high. The evolution of natural acidity develops balanced complexity. Low to high levels of _Brettanomyces_ character should be present, expressed as horsey, goaty, leathery, phenolic, fruity and/or acidic characters, and in balance with other characters. _Brettanomyces_ character may or may not be dominant. Cultured yeast strains may be used in the fermentation. Because some _Brettanomyces_ strains of yeast may not contribute evident and common _Brettanomyces_ character, beers fermented with such yeasts and which do not exhibit such characters would be more appropriately categorized elsewhere, perhaps in a classic beer style. Beers in this style should not use bacteria or exhibit bacteria-derived characters. Moderate to intense yet balanced fruity-ester flavors are evident. Diacetyl and DMS flavors should not be perceived. Wood vessels may be used during the fermentation and aging process, but wood- derived flavors such as vanillin must not be present. Residual flavors that come from liquids previously aged in a barrel such as bourbon or sherry should not be present. Body is evident over a full range from low to high. For purposes of competition entries exhibiting wood-derived characters or characters of liquids previously aged in wood would more appropriately be characterized in other Wood- Aged Beer categories. Wood- and barrel-aged sour ales should not be entered here and are classified elsewhere. _A statement provided by the brewer listing a classic or other style of base beer, fruit or any other ingredients if present is essential for accurate assessment at competitions._

## Vital Statistics:

- OG: Varies with style 
- FG: Varies with style 
- IBUs: Varies with style 
- SRM: Varies with style 
- ABV: Varies with style 