# Wild Beer

Wild Beers are any range of color. These beers may be clear or hazy due to yeast, chill haze or hop haze. Aromas may vary tremendously due to fermentation characters contributed by various known and unknown microorganisms. The overall balance should be complex and balanced. Hop aroma very low to high. Usually because of a high degree of attenuation in these beers, malt character is very low to low. If there are exceptions that are malty, the overall balance of complexity of other characters should be in harmony. Hop flavor very low to high. Hop bitterness is perceived at varying levels depending on the overall balance, but usually perceived as very low to low. Wild beers are "spontaneously" fermented with microorganisms that the brewer has introduced from the ambient air/environment in the vicinity of the brewery in which the beer is brewed. Wild beers may not be fermented with any cultured strains of yeast or bacteria. Wild beer may or may not be perceived as acidic. It may include a wildly variable spectrum of flavors and aromas derived from the wild microorganisms with which it was fermented. The overall balance of flavors, aromas, appearance and body is an important factor in assessing these beers. Body is very low to medium. Spontaneously fermented beers with fruit, spice or other ingredients would be appropriately entered as Wild Beer. At competition, beers which could be appropriately categorized in an existing classic or traditional category such as Belgian- Style Lambic, Gueuze, Fruit Lambic, etc. should be entered in that category and not entered as a Wild Beer. Competition directors may create specific subcategories of Wild Beer, such as Pale or Dark, fruit, spice, etc. A statement provided by the brewer explaining the unique nature of the beer is essential in order for accurate assessment in competitions.

## Vital Statistics:

- OG: Varies with style 
- FG: Varies with style 
- IBUs: Varies with style 
- SRM: Varies with style 
- ABV: Varies with style 