# 27. HISTORICAL BEER

_The Historical Beer category contains styles that either have all but died out in modern times, or that were much more popular in past times and are now known only through recreations. This category can also be used for traditional or indigenous beers of cultural importance within certain countries. Placing a beer in the historical category does not imply that it is not currently being produced, just that it is a very minor style or perhaps is in the process of rediscovery by craft brewers._

_Historical Beer can be a minor style, currently commercially produced or not, that is not present in the Style Guidelines as a Classic Style. It could be that we haven’t heard of it, that we never see it in competition, or that we have insufficient data to prepare a reasonable set of judging guidelines. If it is a style with a name that is or was actually used, then it likely goes into this category. This style is not for experimental beers that were never produced, or for other Classic Styles with added Specialty-Type ingredients._

_Any Historical Beer listed in this category or contained on the Provisional Style list is considered a Classic Style for purposes of entering in Specialty-Type beer categories with added ingredients (fruit, spice, wood, smoke, etc.). This means a Historical Style beer can be used as a base style for Specialty-Type beers without automatically making the beer Experimental._

_The BJCP welcomes well-researched submissions of Historical Styles that may be appropriate for our Provisional Styles list on our website, or for a future inclusion in these Guidelines._

_**Entry Instructions:** The entrant must either specify a style with a BJCP-supplied description from the list below, or specify a different historical beer style that is not described elsewhere in these guidelines. In the case of a style that has changed substantially over the years (such as Porter or Stout), the entrant may specify an existing BJCP style as well as an era (e.g., 1820 English Porter). When the entrant specifies any style not on the BJCP-supplied list in this category or on the Provisional Style list, the entrant must provide a description of the style for the judges in sufficient detail to allow the beer to be judged. If a beer is entered with just a style name and no description, it is very unlikely that judges will understand how to judge it. Currently defined examples:_ Kellerbier, Kentucky Common, Lichtenhainer, London Brown Ale, Piwo Grodziskie, Pre-Prohibition Lager, Pre-Prohibition Porter, Roggenbier, Sahti.
