# 29C. Specialty Fruit Beer

_A **Specialty Fruit Beer** is a Fruit Beer with some additional ingredients, such as fermentable sugars (e.g., honey, brown sugar, invert sugar), sweeteners (e.g., lactose), adjuncts, alternative grains, or other special ingredients added, or some additional process applied. A Specialty Fruit Beer can use any style within the Fruit Beer category as a base style (currently, 29A, 29B, or 29D)._

## Overall Impression: 

A appealing combination of fruit, sugar, and beer, but still recognizable as a beer. The fruit and sugar character should both be evident but in balance with the beer, not so forward as to suggest an artificial product.

## Aroma: 

Same as Fruit Beer, except that some additional fermentables (e.g., honey, molasses) may add an aroma component. Whatever additional aroma component is present should be in balance with the fruit and the beer components, and be a pleasant combination.

## Appearance: 

Same as Fruit Beer.

## Flavor: 

Same as Fruit Beer, except that some additional fermentables (e.g., honey, molasses) may add a flavor component. Whatever additional flavor component is present should be in balance with the fruit and the beer components, and be a pleasant combination. Added sugars should not have a raw, unfermented flavor. Some added sugars will have unfermentable elements that may provide a fuller and sweeter finish; fully fermentable sugars may thin out the finish.

## Mouthfeel: 

Same as Fruit Beer, although depending on the type of sugar added, could increase or decrease the body.

## Comments: 

If the additional fermentables or processes do not add a distinguishable character to the beer, enter it as one of the other (non-Specialty) Fruit Beer styles and omit a description of the extra ingredients or processes.

## Entry Instructions: 

The entrant **must** specify the type of fruit used. The entrant **must** specify the type of additional ingredient (per the introduction) or special process employed. Entrant **must** specify a description of the beer, identifying **either** a Base Style **or** the ingredients, specs, or target character of the beer. A general description of the special nature of the beer can cover all the required items.

## Vital Statistics: 

OG, FG, IBUs, SRM, and ABV will vary depending on the underlying base beer, but the fruit will often be reflected in the color.

## Commercial Examples: 

The Bruery Goses are Red, New Planet Raspberry Ale, Tired Hands Strawberry Milkshake IPA, WeldWerks Piña Colada IPA

## Tags: 

_specialty-beer, fruit_
