# 30D. Specialty Spice Beer

_A **Specialty Spice Beer** is a 30A Spice, Herb, or Vegetable (SHV) Beer with some additional ingredients, such as fermentable sugars (e.g., honey, brown sugar, invert sugar, maple syrup), sweeteners (e.g., lactose), adjuncts, alternative grains, or other special ingredients added, or some additional process applied. 30B Autumn and 30C Winter Seasonal Beers already allow additional ingredients, and should not be used as a base in this style._

## Overall Impression: 

An appealing combination of spices, herbs, or vegetables (SHVs), sugars, and beer, but still recognizable as beer. The SHV and sugar character should both be evident but in balance with the beer, not so forward as to suggest an artificial product. 

## Aroma: 

Same as SHV Beer, except that some additional fermentables (e.g., honey, molasses) may add an aroma component. Whatever additional aroma component is present should be in balance with the SHV and the beer components, and be a pleasant combination.

## Appearance: 

Same as Spice, Herb, or Vegetable Beer.

## Flavor: 

Same as SHV Beer, except that some additional fermentables (e.g., honey, molasses) may add a flavor component. Whatever additional flavor component is present should be in balance with the SHV and the beer components, and be a pleasant combination. Added sugars should not have a raw, unfermented flavor. Some added sugars will have unfermentable elements that may provide a fuller and sweeter finish; fully fermentable sugars may thin out the finish.

## Mouthfeel: 

Same as SHV Beer, although depending on the type of sugar added, could increase or decrease the body.

## Comments: 

If the additional fermentables or processes do not add a distinguishable character to the beer, enter it as one of the other (non-Specialty) Spiced Beer styles and omit a description of the extra ingredients or processes.

## Entry Instructions: 

The entrant **must** specify the type of SHVs used, but individual ingredients do not need to be specified if a well-known spice blend is used (e.g., apple pie spice, curry powder, chili powder). The entrant **must** specify the type of additional ingredient (per the introduction) or special process employed. Entrant **must** specify a description of the beer, identifying either a Base Style **or** the ingredients, specs, or target character of the beer. A general description of the special nature of the beer can cover all the required items.

## Vital Statistics: 

OG, FG, IBUs, SRM, and ABV will vary depending on the underlying base beer.

## Commercial Examples: 

New Belgium Honey Orange Tripel, Westbrook It’s Tiki Time

## Tags: 

_specialty-beer, spice_
