# 31A. Alternative Grain Beer

_An **Alternative Grain Beer** is a standard beer (Classic Style or not) with additional or non-standard brewing grains (e.g., rye, oats, buckwheat, spelt, millet, sorghum, rice) added or used exclusively. Gluten-free (GF) beers made from completely gluten-free ingredients may be entered here, while GF beers using process-based gluten removal should be entered in their respective base style categories._

## Overall Impression: 

A base beer enhanced by or featuring the character of additional grains. The specific character depends greatly on the added grains.

## Aroma: 

Same as base beer style. The added grain will lend a particular character, although with some grains the beer will simply seem a bit more grainy or nutty, and some may have a relatively neutral character.

## Appearance: 

Same as base beer style, although some additional haze may be noticeable.

## Flavor: 

Same as base beer style. The additional grain should be noticeable in flavor, although it may not be necessarily identifiable. Some grains add an additional grainy, bready, or nutty flavor, while others simply enhance the flavor of the base beer. Some grains add a dryness to the finish.

## Mouthfeel: 

Same as the base beer, although many additional grains (e.g., oats, rye) increase body and viscosity, while some (e.g., GF grains) create a thinner beer. 

## Comments: 

The additional grain should be apparent somewhere in the sensory profile. If the alternative grain does not provide a noticeable distinguishable character to the beer, enter it as the base style. This style should not be used for styles where the alternative grain is fundamental to the style definition (e.g., Rye IPA, Oatmeal Stout, Rice- or Corn-based International Lager). Note that sake is not beer, and is not intended for this category.

## Entry Instructions: 

The entrant must specify the type of alternative grain used. Entrant must specify a description of the beer, identifying either a Base Style or the ingredients, specs, or target character of the beer. A general description of the special nature of the beer can cover all the required items.

## Vital Statistics: 

OG, FG, IBUs, SRM, and ABV will vary depending on the underlying base beer.

## Commercial Examples: 

Blue/Point Rastafarye Ale, Green’s India Pale Ale, Lakefront New Grist, New Planet Pale Ale, Rogue Morimoto Soba Ale, Voodoo Swimming Jeans

## Tags: 

_specialty-beer_
