# 3A. Czech Pale Lager

## Overall Impression: 

A lighter-bodied, rich, refreshing, hoppy, bitter pale Czech lager having the familiar flavors of the stronger Czech Premium Pale Lager (Pilsner-type) beer but in a lower alcohol, lighter-bodied, and slightly less intense format.

## Aroma: 

Light to moderate bready-rich malt combined with light to moderate spicy or herbal hop bouquet; the balance between the malt and hops may vary. Faint hint of caramel is acceptable. Light (but never intrusive) diacetyl and light, fruity esters are optional. No sulfur.

## Appearance: 

Light yellow to deep gold color. Brilliant to very clear, with a long-lasting, creamy white head. 

## Flavor: 

Medium-low to medium bready-rich malt flavor with a rounded, hoppy finish. Low to medium-high spicy or herbal hop flavor. Bitterness is prominent but never harsh. Flavorful and refreshing. Low diacetyl or fruity esters are optional, but should never be overbearing.

## Mouthfeel: 

Medium-light to medium body. Moderate carbonation.

## Comments: 

The Czech name of the style is _světlé výčepní pivo_.

## History: 

Josef Groll initially brewed two types of pale beer in 1842–3, a _výčepní_ and a _ležák_, with the smaller beer having twice the production; Evan Rail speculates that these were probably 10 °P and 12 °P beers, but that the _výčepní_ could have been weaker. This is the most consumed type of beer in the Czech Republic at present.
 
## Characteristic Ingredients: 

Soft water with low sulfate and carbonate content. Traditional Czech hops. Czech Pilsner malt. Czech lager yeast. Low ion water provides a distinctively soft, rounded hop profile despite high hopping rates.

## Style Comparison: 

A lighter-bodied, lower-intensity, refreshing, everyday version of Czech Premium Pale Lager.

## Vital Statistics:	

- OG:	1.028 – 1.044
- FG:	1.008 – 1.014
- IBUs:	20 – 35	
- SRM:	3 – 6	
- ABV:	3.0 – 4.1%

## Commercial Examples: 

Bernard světlé pivo 10, Březňák světlé výčepní pivo, Notch Session Pils, Primátor Antonín světlé výčepní, Radegast Rázna 10, Únětické pivo 10°

## Tags: 

_session-strength, pale-color, bottom-fermented, lagered, central-europe, traditional-style, pale-lager-family, bitter, hoppy_
