# 5C. German Helles Exportbier

## Overall Impression: 

A golden German lager balancing a smooth malty profile with a bitter, hoppy character in a slightly above-average body and strength beer. 

## Aroma: 

Medium-low to medium floral, spicy, or herbal hop aroma. Moderate grainy-sweet malt aroma, possibly with light toasty, bready, or doughy notes. Clean fermentation profile. Hops and malt both noticeable, and generally balanced.

## Appearance: 

Medium yellow to deep gold. Clear. Persistent white head.

## Flavor: 

Moderate, balanced malt and hops with supporting bitterness. Malt and hop flavors similar to aroma (same descriptors and intensities). Medium, noticeable bitterness, full on the palate, with a medium-dry finish. Clean fermentation character. Aftertaste of both malt and hops, generally in balance. Mineral character typically perceived more as a roundness and fullness of flavor, and a dry, flinty sharpness in the finish rather than overt mineral flavors. Background sulfate optional.

## Mouthfeel: 

Medium to medium-full body. Medium carbonation. Smooth and mellow on the palate. Very slight warmth may be noted in stronger versions.

## Comments: 

Also known Dortmunder Export, Dortmunder, Export, or simply a Dort. Called Export within Germany, and often Dortmunder elsewhere, Export is also a beer strength descriptor under German brewing tradition, and could be applied to other styles. Splits the difference between a German Pils and a Munich Helles in several aspects: color, hop-malt balance, finish, bitterness.

## History: 

Developed in Dortmund in the Ruhr industrial region in the 1870s in response to pale Pilsner-type beers. It became very popular after World War II but declined in the 1970s. Other Export-class beers developed independently, and reflected a slightly stronger version of existing beers.

## Characteristic Ingredients: 

Minerally water with high levels of sulfates, carbonates, and chlorides. Traditional German or Czech hops. Pilsner malt. German lager yeast. Decoction mash traditional.

## Style Comparison: 

Less finishing hops and more body than a German Pils. More bitter and drier than a Munich Helles. Stronger, drier, but less hoppy than a Czech Premium Pale Lager.

## Vital Statistics:	

- OG:	1.050 – 1.058
- FG:	1.008 – 1.015
- IBUs:	20 – 30	
- SRM:	4 – 6	
- ABV:	5.0 – 6.0%

## Commercial Examples: 

Chuckanut Export Dortmunder Lager, DAB Dortmunder Export, Dortmunder Kronen, Landshuter Edel Hell, Müllerbräu Export Gold, Schönramer Gold

## Tags: 

_standard-strength, pale-color, bottom-fermented, lagered, central-europe, traditional-style, pale-lager-family, balanced_
