# Style Description Language

The guidelines are a set of long documents, and some style descriptions are quite involved. To keep the prose from being bone-dry boring, synonyms (words or phrases meaning exactly the same thing, or having nearly the same meaning) are frequently used. Do not attempt to read more into the use of synonyms than is intended. In the past, some have questioned the difference between _light_ and _low_, _medium_ and _moderate_, deep and dark, and many other similar examples – the answer is, there is no difference between these words in this context; they are intended to mean the same things (often, relative intensities of perceptions). Take these words at their plain meaning. If you find yourself parsing the guidelines like you’re trying to find a secret message in a song played backwards, you’re trying too hard.

When we use multiple words to mean similar things, we are simply trying to be literate, and to use a reasonably educated vocabulary. We don’t want to be the Language Police by saying that one synonym is always right and others are always wrong. So don’t look for inconsistencies in usage, or try to add nuanced distinctions in different words used to express the same concept. Don’t require that words in the style guidelines be the exact same words used on scoresheets or exams. Worry more about the concept being conveyed and less about the precise expression of the concept.

We stylize lists using the Oxford comma, which is a less ambiguous grammatical construct. When describing lists of characteristics, **or** means _any or all of the items may be present_, **all** means _all of the items must be present_, **either or** means _only one of the items can be present_, **neither nor** means _none of the items can be present_. Past usage of **and**/**or** has been replaced by **or**, which has the same logical meaning.

When we use style names in Capital Letters, we are intending them to be a cross-reference to those styles within these guidelines. Lowercase usage of style names represents a more general reference.

Pay careful attention to the modifiers used in style descriptions. Look for guidance on the magnitude and quality of each characteristic. Notice that many characteristics are optional; beers not evidencing these non-required elements should not be marked down. If an intensity is used in conjunction with an optional indicator, that means any intensity from none up to the listed intensity are allowable, but that the characteristic is not required.

Phrases such as _may have_, _can contain_, _might feature_, _is acceptable_, _is appropriate_, _is typical_, _optionally_, etc. all indicators of **optional** elements. **Required** elements are generally written as declaratory phrases, or use words such as _must_ or _should_. Elements that must **not** be present often use phrases such as _is inappropriate_, _no_, or _must not_. Again, take these words at their plain meaning.

Do not overly focus on single words or phrases within style descriptions to the exclusion of the broader intent. Understand the overall impression of the style, the general balance, and how the style differs from related or similar styles. Do not disproportionately weight specific phrases if that would change the overall impression, balance, and meaning of the style, or if it would cause the beer to be disqualified or otherwise marked down for style issues.