# Using the Style Guidelines

When we published previous versions of the style guidelines, we had no idea how prevalent and pervasive they would become. We believed we were creating a standardized set of style descriptions for use in homebrew competitions, but then found they were widely adopted worldwide to describe beer in general. Many countries with emerging craft beer markets are now using them as handbooks for what to brew. Consumers and trade groups began using the styles to describe their products. And unfortunately, many made astounding leaps of logic well beyond our original intent, and subsequently used the guidelines as a sort of universal Rosetta Stone for beer.

While we understand that our guidelines may have been misused in contexts beyond our original intent, we’ve also observed them being misused in competitions and for other BJCP purposes such as exam preparation and grading. Some people misinterpret the guidelines, and then often unknowingly instruct others in their misuse. Our hope is that the information in this section will help prevent many cases of misinterpretation and misuse in the future. If anyone encounters someone using the guidelines incorrectly, please refer them to this section.

The following maxims express our original intent, and are designed to limit misuse, not to prevent the guidelines from being adopted for new uses:

1. **The BJCP Style Guidelines are _guidelines_ not _specifications_**. Take those words at face value, or their plain meaning. Guidelines are meant to describe general characteristics of the most common examples, and serve as an aid for judging; they are not meant to be rigorously-applied specifications that are used to punish slightly unusual examples. They are suggestions, not hard limits. Allow for some flexibility in judging so that well-crafted examples can be rewarded. The guidelines are written in detail to facilitate the process of the structured evaluation of beer as practiced in homebrewing competitions; don’t use each individual statement in style descriptions as a reason to disqualify a beer.

2.	**The Style Guidelines were written primarily for homebrew competitions**. Individual style descriptions are written primarily to aid in judging. We have, in some cases, sought to define clear lines between styles to create non-overlapping judging categories. We understand that some styles may overlap in the market, and some commercial examples may straddle boundaries. We have organized style categories for the purpose of organizing homebrew competitions, not for describing and communicating the styles of the world to a different audience.

3.	**We know many people use our guidelines**. We understand that other organizations or groups are using our guidelines for purposes well beyond our original intent. To the extent that those groups find value in our work, we are happy to have our guidelines used. We freely allow our naming and numbering system to be used by others. However, don’t make rash assumptions about the nature of beer and beer styles based on applications of the guidelines beyond their original intent. We also know some craft brewers are using our guidelines to rediscover historical styles, or to brew styles not native to their country – we are thrilled to be able to help advance craft beer in this way. Just remember that it’s not our original mission to do this; it’s just a happy side-effect.

4.	**Styles change over time**. Beer styles change over the years, and some styles are open to interpretation and debate. Simply because a style _name_ hasn’t changed over the years, doesn’t mean that _the beers themselves_ haven’t also changed. Commercial brewers subject to government regulation and market forces definitely change their products over time. For example, because there is now a beer known as _porter_ doesn’t mean that it has always been made that way throughout its history. Our beer styles are generally meant to describe modern beers currently available, unless otherwise specified (e.g., in the Historical Beer category).

5.	**Not every commercial beer fits our styles**. Don’t assume that every beer fits neatly into one of our categories. Some breweries revel in creating examples that don’t match our (or anyone else’s) guidelines. Some create beer called by a style name that deliberately doesn’t match our guidelines. It’s perfectly fine for a commercial beer to not match one of our styles; we have not attempted to categorize every commercial beer – that is neither our intent nor our mission.

6.	**We have not defined every possible beer style**. _Of course_ we know of beer styles that aren’t defined in our guidelines. Perhaps they are obscure or unpopular, homebrewers aren’t making the styles, insufficient examples or research material exists to adequately define them to our standards, or they are from a part of the world we haven’t visited extensively. Maybe they are historical styles no longer made, or that we believe the styles are a passing fad. Regardless of our reasons, don’t believe that our guidelines represent the complete categorization of every beer style ever made – they aren’t. They do, however, describe the beers most commonly made today by homebrewers and many craft breweries.

7.	**Commercial examples change over time**. Just like beer styles change, individual examples change as well. A beer that was once a great example of a style might not always remain so. Sometimes the beer changes (with ownership change, perhaps) or sometimes the style trend changes but the beer doesn’t. For example, Anchor Liberty helped define the American IPA style when it was created, but it seems much more like typical American Pale Ales today.

8.	**Ingredients change over time**. Hops are a good example today; new varieties are coming to market with unique characteristics. Brewers looking for a differentiator may be rapidly adopting (and abandoning) ingredients. It is difficult to say that the profile of a beer style is fixed when its typical ingredients are changing constantly. Allow for these changes when judging beer. For example, not all American hops will be citrusy or piney. Don’t be rigid about judging based on what was commonly used at the time of this writing; understand what ingredients are typically used, and adapt judging to match the evolving character.

9.	**Most styles are fairly broad**. Some believe that our styles inhibit brewer creativity by rigidly setting boundaries. That is not our intent – we think creativity drives innovation, and that interpretation by brewers should be allowed. However, not every innovation is a good idea, or results in a beer that is recognizable in the same grouping of others with the same name. Therefore, styles should be interpreted as having some flexibility, but within reason.

10.	**The Style Guidelines are not the Ten Commandments**. The words in this document are not due to divine inspiration – they were written by people making a good faith effort to describe beer as it is perceived. Don’t treat them as some kind of Holy Scripture. Don’t get so lost in parsing individual words that you lose sight of the overall intent. The most important part of any style is the overall balance and impression; that is, that the beer reminds you of the style, and is a nicely drinkable product. To get lost in the individual descriptions loses the essence of the style. The mere fact that style descriptions can change from one edition of the guidelines to the next should be the clearest illustration that the words themselves are not sacred.

11. **Our Guidelines are extensible**. We understand that our guidelines will change in the future, and that there may be years between revision cycles. The BJCP’s primary mission is to conduct exams, and if the references changed constantly, it would make studying nearly impossible. So, we have adopted a compromise: we have Provisional Styles listed on our website that can be used in the same way as styles in these guidelines. This allows us to add changes between editions. We also have a list of Style Entry Suggestions on our website to help understand where best to enter styles not defined in the guidelines or as a Provisional Style. These features, as well as the extensibility of some styles such as Specialty IPA and Historical Beer, allow brewer-defined styles to be used in competitions. Combined, these three features allow the guidelines to evolve between major updates.

12. **We are not the beer police**. We categorize and describe beer styles that we see exist, and that are used. In no way are we telling commercial brewers what they can brew, or saying that they are wrong if their products don’t fit our guidelines. We also do not create styles in the hopes that they will become popular. The state of the overall beer market in any given country is not our concern.

13. **Different formats exist**. Our guidelines appear in many third-party locations, on multiple mobile platforms, and are translated into other languages. Unfortunately, not all these versions contain the full text of our guidelines, or are completely accurate translations. Be careful when using a format supplied by someone other than the BJCP; when in doubt, always refer to the original source.

14. **The BJCP does not run competitions**. Sometimes competitions use entry software that limits comments, or otherwise makes it difficult to comply with Entry Instructions in the guidelines. Report problems to competition organizers and to the software suppliers. Our intent is that all allowable information requested by the guidelines be supplied by brewers, be accepted by competitions, and be furnished to judges.